---
title: Books 2016
layout: post
date: 2017-01-10
tag: books
---

I set myself two goals for 2016 and I failed at both.
The first was to run 1000km over the course of the year.
At the beginning of December I was well ahead of target at 985km, but then I fell off a climbing wall and badly sprained my ankle, so I finished the year at 985km as well.

My second goal was to read a book every week.
I failed this by a bigger margin than the running, managing 43 books in total.
But this was still more books than I've read in a single year since I was about 20, so I'm still pretty happy.
On the whole I was quite lucky in my choices and I read some really good books last year.
I've written a little bit about some of the best ones below.
The full list of books is [here](http://www.tkmharris.net/booklist/2016/).


***The Greenlanders**, Jane Smiley.*  
Smiley seems to not be very well-known in the UK; I found this book on a list of
famous authors' favourite under-appreciated novels. It turned out to be probably
my favourite of all the books I read last year. *The Greenlanders* is a
multi-generational family saga set among the medieval Norse colony on Greenland.
Told in plain language that evokes the sagas, this is a wonderful portrait of a
people forgotten by the outside world and barely clinging to life in the face of
creeping ecological catastrophe.

***My Struggle 3,4,5**, Karl Ove Knausg&#229;rd.*  
I read the first two volumes of Knausg&#229;rd's groundbreaking autobiography in
2015, and the next three over the course of 2016. Over the course of six
volumes, Knausg&#229;rd writes everything of significance that has ever happened
to him (and plenty more that is not significant). In doing so he reveals his most
shameful self in the hope of saying something true.
Anything that attracts as much critical acclaim as *My Struggle* inevitably
suffers a backlash, but I can't say that these are overrated. They're not to
everyone's taste perhaps, but I think the acclaim is well-deserved. Comparisons
are usually drawn with Elena Ferrante's *Neapolitan* series; I haven't read
those yet, but I'm looking forward to comparing them.

***An Account of the Decline of the Great Auk, According to One Who Saw It**,
Jessie Greengrass.*  
Fantastic debut collection of short stories. I have a hard time describing
exactly what I liked about these stories, except that they expertly capture
certain atmospheres (especially the title story, which was my favourite). I
tried to write something earlier this year about how we should read fewer
thinkpieces, or thinkpiece stand-ins, and more things like this that are
actually nourishing. The catalyst for writing that was because I read about
half of a really shit book about the blockchain, and I wanted to argue for a
return to reading for pleasure. But I gave up because I couldn't find anything
interesting to say: Hacker-News-fodder books are obviously bad. These stories
are good though; give them a go.

***The Outrun**, Amy Liptrot.*  
Stark and moving memoir of the author's return to Orkney and recovery from
alcoholism. The writing cuts back and forth between Liptrot's busy,
disintegrating life in London and her sober days wandering the Scottish islands.
There are some particularly nice descriptions of the island landscape and
wildlife. I've long been a fan of the psychogeography writing of Deakin,
Macfarlane, Tallach, and others. What I liked most about Liptrot's book is that
it attempts to reconcile a love of the outdoors and romantic traditionalism with
a modern life lived online.

***Aurora**, Kim Stanley Robinson.*  
A modern hard sci-fi set on a generation ship headed to colonise another world.
I read it on the strength of a boing boing essay by Robinson:
[Our Generation Ships Will Sink](https://boingboing.net/2015/11/16/our-generation-ships-will-sink.html),
so maybe read that first as a taster. The book didn't disappoint. I worry a lot
that the tech utopianism driving Elon Musk's spaceX (and similar enterprises) is
drawing attention away from the very real environmental problems we face, in
favour of an uncertain solution. *Aurora* is pessimistic about space
colonisation and makes a strong case for ecological stewardship of the Earth.

***Eichmann in Jerusalem: a report on the banality of evil**, Hannah Arendt.*  
Arendt's classic report from Adolf Eichmann's trial by the Israel government for
enabling the genocide of the jews by the holocaust. Lots of good and deep
questions about the nature of law, jurisdiction, intent, and evil. Mainly this
book made me redouble my intention to spend more time trying to understand
thorny sociological problems of importance and less time trying to understand
the dynamics of niche online communities.

***Ludwig Wittgenstein: the Duty of Genius**, Ray Monk.*  
The best biography of the best philosopher of the 20th century. What is
interesting about Wittgenstein is that while he was clearly a difficult person,
his intentions never seem to be lacking. His soul was somehow pure, he was a
walking argument against consequentialism. Meanwhile, Monk has since made it
clear that (Wittgenstein's teacher) Bertand Russel's outward moral purity
covered an ugly personality. This is an excellent biography, and a useful first
look at Wittgenstein's philosophy.
