---
title: Booklist 2015
layout: default
tags: booklist
---

These are the books I read in 2015. Re-reads are marked
with an asterisk (&lowast;).
Works read in translation are marked with a dagger (&dagger;).

1. **Ayoade on Ayoade: a cinematic odyssey**, Richard Ayoade.  
Very, very funny. Did you know Werner Herzog is too self-conscious to eat Wiener
Hotdogs?

2. **My Struggle 1: a death in the family**, Karl Ove Knausg&#229;rd. &dagger;  
The first volume of Knausg&#229;rd's autobiographical cycle.
It's brutally honest and incredibly good.

3. **Good Omens**, Terry Pratchett and Neil Gaiman.  
One of the few Pratchett books I didn't already read as a teenager.

4. **A View from the Foothills: the diaries of Chris Mullin 1999-2005**.  
An excellent insider's account of the Blair years.

5. **The Buried Giant**, Kazuo Ishiguro.  
Interesting attempt to explore the author's usual fascinations in a fantasy
setting.

6. **Lords and Ladies**, Terry Pratchett. &lowast;  
My favourite Pratchett book as a child, re-read after he died.

7. **So You've Been Publicly Shamed**, Jon Ronson.  
An exploration of the rise of trial-by-Twitter. Interesting,
but lacking deep analysis.

8. **Landmarks**, Robert Macfarlane.  
A celebration of MacFarlane's favourite nature writers.
Enjoyable, but not of the same standard as MacFarlane's The Old Ways*.

9. **The Cyberiad**, Stanis&#x142;aw Lem. &dagger;  
Weird, humourous fables from the early days of science fiction.
Excellent translation.

10. **Lightning Rods**, Helen DeWitt.  
A satire of American business culture, inspired by *The Producers*.

11. **In the All-Night Caf&eacute;:
a memoir of Belle and Sebastian's formative year**, Stuart David.  
Music biographies aren't really my thing,
but I made an exception since I like Belle and Sebastian so much.

12. **Foundation**, Isaac Asimov. &lowast;
13. **Foundation and Empire**, Isaac Asimov.
14. **Second Foundation**, Isaac Asimov.  
More space opera than the introspective sci-fi of Stanis&#x142;aw Lem.

15. **This Changes Everything**, Naomi Klein.  
A rigorous discussion of the problem of climate change in a
liberal capitalist world. Frankly this made me pretty despondent for the future.

16. **Cakes, Custard, and Category Theory,** Eugenia Cheng.  
I'm afraid I didn't enjoy this very much,
I found it hard to distinguish from other pop-maths books.

17. **My Struggle 2: a man in love**, Karl Ove Knausg&#229;rd. &dagger;  
Even better than the first volume.
The author is fearlessly honest in trying to show himself as he really is.

18. **North**, Seamus Heaney.  
Possibly the best collection by one of the very best poets of the 20th century.

19. **Alan Turing: the Enigma**, Andrew Hodges.  
The gold standard for a scientific biography. Rather technical in places.

20. **The Innocence of Father Brown**, G. K. Chesterton.  
Catholic detective stories.

21. **A Room with a View**, E. M. Forster. &lowast;  
A re-read of an old favourite.

22. **Purity**, Jonathan Franzen.  
The latest big, ambitious novel by Franzen.

23. **Decline and Fall: the diaries of Chris Mullin 2005-2010**.  
Further diaries from Mullin detailing the last years of New Labour.

24. **Everything and More: a brief history of infinity**,
David Foster Wallace.  
A spirited attempt to write an interesting lay person's history of the
mathematics of the transfinite. Contains some pretty huge maths blunders.

25. **Last Night in Montreal**, Emily St.John Mandel.  
Short first novel by the Canadian author.

26. **The Way of the Runner**, Adharanand Finn.  
The author moves to Japan for 6 months to discover what
he can learn from its unique running culture.

27. **The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo**, Stieg Larsson. &dagger;  

28. **The Girl who Played with Fire**, Stieg Larsson. &dagger;  

29. **The Girl who Kicked the Hornet's Nest**, Stieg Larsson. &dagger;  
I didn't read these during the hype period of about a decade ago.
Suffice to say they were as gripping as expected.

30. **The Lady in the Van**, Alan Bennett. &lowast;  
Sort of a re-read, since I read part of this in school.

31. **The Road to Little Dribbling**, Bill Bryson.  
Further observations from travels around Britain by the author of
*Notes from a Small Island*.

32. **Not That Kind of Girl**, Lena Dunham.  
Autobiographical essays by the creator of *Girls*.

33. **Look Who's Back**, Timur Vermes. &dagger;
Hitler wakes up in 2011 and is taken for a method actor performing extreme satire.
Misunderstandings ensue.

34. **60 Degrees North: around the world in search of home**,
Malachy Tallack.
Part memoir, part travelogue.
The author travels around the world on the 60th parrallel,
beginning and ending on his native Shetland.

35. **Girls to the Front: the true story of the riot grrrl revolution**,
Sara Marcus.
An intimate portrait of the feminist subculture.
