---
title: Booklist 2016
layout: default
tags: booklist
---

These are the books I read in 2016. Re-reads are marked
with an asterisk (&lowast;).
Works read in translation are marked with a dagger (&dagger;).

1. **Two Girls, One on Each Knee: the puzzling, playful world of
the crossword**, Alan Connor.  
A nice little book about the history of crosswords.
The entire book is arranged as a puzzle, with clues supplied by Araucaria.

2. **Berlin Poplars**, Anne B. Ragde. &dagger;  
A short comic novel about Norwegian identity and self-definition through family.

3. **Consolations of the Forest**, Sylvain Tesson. &dagger;  
A diary of six months spent living alone in the wilderness,
during the Siberian winter, in a log cabin on the shores of Lake Baikal.

4. **To the Lighthouse**, Virginia Woolf.  
What more to say? It's difficult and dense and brilliant.

5. **Tamara Drewe**, Posy Simmonds.  &lowast;  
A modern comic strip reworking of **Far from the Madding Crowd**.

6. **My Struggle 3: Boyhood Island**, Karl Ove Knausg&#229;rd. &dagger;  
This third volume covers Knausg&#229;rd's life up to
age 12 or so on the island of Trom&oslash;ya.

7. **The Thrilling Adventures of Lovelace and Babbage**, Sydney Padua.  
Collection the author's '2d goggles' comic strips
about the alternate-universe adventures of Ada Lovelace and
Charles Babbage (with informative footnotes).

8. **Ludwig Wittgenstein: the Duty of Genius**, Ray Monk.  
Wittgenstein lived a beautiful life.

9. **A303: the Highway to the Sun**, Tom Fort.  
This is a very silly book.

10. **We Have Always Lived in the Castle**, Shirley Jackson.  
I wonder why so much gothic horror is set in New England?
*(edit: one-word answer suggested by Emilio Pierro -- "Puritans")*

11. **Siddhartha**, Hermann Hesse. &dagger;  
The grandfather of modern spirituality books.

12. **The Outrun**, Amy Liptrot.  
A stark and moving memoir of the author's return to Orkney and recovery
from alcoholism.

13. **Station Eleven**, Emily StJohn Mandel.  
Station Eleven follows a traveling symphony and theatre company
around a postapocalyptic northern US and Canada.

14. **The Winter's Tale**, William Shakespeare.  
This was not my favourite Shakespeare play.
The bear bit wasn't as good as I expected it to be.

15. **All One Breath**, John Burnside.  
A nice recent collection of lyric poems.

16. **The Greenlanders**, Jane Smiley.  
Family saga set in the final years of the Norse
settlement on Greenland.

17. **The Virgin Suicides**, Jeffrey Eugenides.  
Short novel about the group suicide of the Lisbon girls
as told (in the first-person plural) by their teenage neighbours.

18. **No One Belongs Here More Than You**, Miranda July.  
A collection of short stories about sad, lonely, and isolated people.

19. **Eichmann in Jerusalem: a report on the banality of evil**, Hannah Arendt.  
Report from Eichmann's trial for crimes against humanity.

20. **My Struggle 4: Dancing in the Dark**, Karl Ove Knausg&#229;rd. &dagger;  
The fourth volume describes Knausg&#229;rd's late teenage years: girls, drinking,
and his earliest attempts to be a writer.

21. **A Book for Her**, Bridget Christie.  
Comic memoir/feminist rant.

22. **Public Library (and other stories)**, Ali Smith.  
Short stories on books and libraries written in reaction to government cuts.

23. **The Shpeherd's Life: a tale of the Lake District**, James Rebanks.  
An appreciation of traditional methods of farming, as practiced by the author.

24. **An Account of the Decline of the Great Auk, According to One Who Saw It**, Jessie Greengrass.  
Fantastic debut collection of short stories.

25. **Blockchain Revolution**, Don Tapscott & Alex Tapscott.  
Terrible, I didn't finish it.

26. **Prime Numbers and the Riemann Hypothesis**, Barry Mazur & William Stein.  
Explains as simply as possible (but not more so) what the Riemann hypothesis says and why it is important.

27. **Aurora**, Kim Stanley Robinson.  
Hard sci-fi set on a generation ship headed to colonise another star system.

28. **A Mathematician's Year in Japan**, Joel David Hamkins.  
Amusing and playful account of a maths professor's year spent as a visiting fellow in Kobe.

29. **From Asgard to Valhalla**, Heather  O'Donoghue.  
A history of the interpretation of Norse mythology.

30. **Space Below my Feet**, Gwen Moffat.  
The memoirs of Britain's first female mountain guide.

31. **Three Men in a Boat**, Jerome K. Jerome.  &lowast;  
Still hilarious.

32. **The Girl in the Spider's Web**, David Lagercrantz.  
A continuation of the late Stieg Larsson's *Millenium* series.

33. **Littlewood's Miscellany**, J. E. Littlewood.  
More fun than Hardy's *Apology*, but less coherent.

34. **The Shipping News**, Annie Proulx.  
Novel set in a Newfoundland fishing community.

35. **Grief is the Thing with Feathers**, Max Porter.  
Fantastic, but hard to describe.

36. **The Collected Cat Rackham**, Steve Wolfhard.  
Sweet and sad comics about a cat who wears a t-shirt and is depressed.

37. **The Woman in Black**, Susan Hill.  
A classic ghost story.

38. **We Don't Know What We're Doing**, Thomas Morris.  
A debut collection of short stories, all set in Caerphilly.

39. **My Struggle 5: Some Rain Must Fall**, Karl Ove Knausg&#229;rd. &dagger;  
Covers the 14 years that Knausg&#229;rd spent living in Bergen, from beginning university to the end of his first marriage.

40. **The One Hundred Nights of Hero**, Isabel Greenberg.  
Long comic about stories and storytelling.

41. **The Idea of North**, Peter Davidson.  
A study of ideas of North across cultures and through history.

42. **Titus Groan**, Mervyn Peake.  
The first book in Peake's *Ghomenghast* trilogy. Modern gothic, quite ulike anything else.

43. **The Wee Free Men**, Terry Practchett. &lowast;  
A re-read over Christmas.
