---
title: Kill All Normies&colon; a failed review
layout: post
date: 2017-07-30
tags: [books, internet]
image: /assets/images/2017-07-30/feelsbadman.jpg
---



In the final days of summer 2014 a lot of people got very very angry on the internet about the representation of women in video games. Or rather, they got angry about people pushing for less awful representation of women{% fn %} and in video games. I haven't played video games much since I was a teenager, and I've never participated in the culture surrounding them, so this would normally have passed me by completely. At the time though I was spending most of my evenings alone sitting in my little flat in Southampton, kicking around for things to do instead of writing my PhD thesis, and I got drawn in. Not drawn in enough to actually participate in the arguments of course, but enough to know far more about 'GamerGate'&mdash;and its notable personalities and their sworn enemies&mdash;than I ever would have wished for.

At the time we laughed about how ridiculous it all ways, mocking the GamerGators' comically overblown rhetoric, which interpreted mild feminist critiques of a popular form of media as a war on white men, the beginning of the literal end of western civilisation.
It's not true that I'm not laughing any more; these people are still worthy of ridicule as well as contempt, their rhetoric has gotten no less amusing in its delusion, even as it is promulgated by more and more mainstream figures. But I'd prefer the joke stopped.

Angela Nagle's book *Kill All Normies* (subtitled *online culture wars from 4chan and Tumblr to Trump and the alt-right*) seeks to explain the flowering of the alt-right as a reaction against the mainstreaming of identity politics online. I find this thesis pretty convincing. There's no question that GamerGate marks the beginning of the alt-right as popularly conceived. The mad gamers were not the movement's only or even most important tributary, but their months-long tantrum and the support they attracted from every anti-feminist grifter on the internet marks the crystallisation of these groups into a cultural phenomenon. The mess of resentments that had been bubbling away for years at the progressive victories of liberals in spaces they conceived of as traditionally male burst forth upon the extremely flimsy pretext of "ethics in video games journalism".{% fn %} The question is why such age-old prejudices are now expressed as a movement. Nagle's answer is that the alt-right is a response to the success of the 'identitarian left' in making certain kinds of rhetoric culturally unacceptable. The kinds of people who would later become the body politic of the alt-right (one useful term Nagle uses for these people is "South Park conservatives") had been making fun of feminists, trans people, and anti-racism activists for over a decade; it was only in the years leading up to GamerGate that the tide started to shift and people realised that the liberal activists were starting to *win*. When they realised that the things they'd be making fun of were being taken seriously, that their attitudes would not remain the status quo, that was when the alt-right became a reactionary movement.

One of the stupider criticisms levelled at *Kill All Normies* is that since many of the constituent groups of reactionaries in the grand alt-right coalition existed long before trigger warnings and feminist criticism of video games became mainstream, Nagle's analysis must be invalid. This is obviously flawed: it's true that the parts existed separately for long before, but the alt-right as a self-aware mass movement emerged only a couple of years ago.{% fn %} Whether the "Tumblr left" (Nagle's term) is *to blame* for the alt-right another question, but the existence of internet shitheads pre-2014 doesn't rule it out.

I don't think its true that the alt-right formed because of anything so small as Tumblr, but I do think that Tumblr, liberal Twitter and similar communities form the vanguard of the broader movement towards social liberalism that the alt-right is reacting against. This is not to say that I think more social liberalism is a bad thing&mdash;as others defending Nagle have pointed out, it's possible acknowledge the source of a reaction without condemning the source or condoning the reactionaries. The reason for much of the resistance to Nagle's book, though, is that she *does* condemn a lot of the identity politics crowd. Nagle has attracted a lot of criticism for her unsympathetic view of the identitarian left, and as if to confirm her point a lot of the reviews have been (at best unintentionally) dishonest in the ways that culture wars seem to engender.

While Nagle's book is about the culture war between the "Tumblr left" and the alt-right, the reviews have mainly been informed the smaller intra-left culture war between&mdash;very roughly&mdash;those concerned with culture/identity and those who take a more materialist line. Nagle falls into the latter camp. The people on the materialist left are, in theory at least, sympathetic to identity issues, but they see them in the broader context of the fight against capitalism. Their discontent with much of the identitarian left comes down to the observation that progressivism on social issues can be used as a smokescreen to allow deeply economically conservative parties to present themselves as liberal.{% fn %} *Kill All Normies* is full of this kind of analysis:
> It seems to me that politics ... has been hollowed out too much into *little other* that a purely cultural politics over the last half-century, which the ugly spectacle of the Trump-Hilary represented the logical conclusion of &ndash; politics as culture war.

and
> In modern politics, liberal leaders are forgiven for drone bombing as long as they're cool with gay marriage

This is fair criticism of centrists, and fair criticism too I think of identitarian progressives who are happy to settle for unjust systems so long as they are nominally respected. The problem with making these kinds of criticisms in the current climate of culture war is that to marginalised people who have to spend all of their time defending their identities, any criticism that appears even slightly hostile is going to be taken as a full-on attack. I don't think that Nagle is wrong when she notes that the tactics of some on the identitarian left have not been particularly helpful in combating the rise of the right. I think as well that those tactics have in some cases have helped push people further right. And, broached differently, I think Nagle's arguments could win some of those people over.

Unfortunately, rather than approaching these points sensitively, Nagle's book seems designed in places to rub her critics up the wrong way. Her criticism of the identity left is rather less fair than her criticism of the alt-right: for the most part she lets the hideous views and actions of the alt-right speak for themselves, quoting their repulsive shit at length and allowing us to pass fair judgement. Nagle quotes some of the shittier stuff from the most performatively woke people on the identity left too,
but she makes it clear that she takes these people to stand for the whole. On the basis of a lot of anecdote she characterises the entire identity left as "hysterical" inhabitants of "intellectually shut-down" worlds, essentially unredeemable&mdash;but she affords Milo Yiannopoulos & others the benefit of the doubt, treating them as "thinkers" with "ideas" that can be challenged. She seems unable to distinguish the list of fantasy genders she found on Tumblr, which she quotes mockingly at length, from the scholarship of Judith Butler and generally accepted ideas of gender performativity. Before reading the book I thought some of the criticism of Nagle as transphobic sounded pretty overblown, but the tone of *Kill All Normies* is uniformly derisive towards trans people. I don't know if Angela Nagle really is a transphobe, but her writing sounds pretty TERFy to me (air-quoting "non-binary" and "transphobia" is not going to win you any fans). Nagle sounds at times like some of the more articulate members of the alt-right who she is supposedly telling us how to fight. If she's trying to persuade people on the identity left that their tactics aren't working, then this feels like a rhetorical failure even if you don't agree that it's a moral one.

Nagle's rather unpleasant disdain for trans politics has all but scuppered her chances of sympathetic readings from most of her audience, but let's put that aside and see what else she has to say. A good chunk of *Kill Alll Normies* is given over to journalistic descriptions of the pre-history of the alt-tight, the various groups united in their hatred of the progressive left (particluarly the 'manosphere', Nagle's gateway into studying online anti-feminism). Nagle spends a lot of time distinguishing the "alt-light" from the subset of the alt-right true "alt-right" This is useful background for the outsider, but I can't think of many people who would be interested in reading the book (or this review) who doesn't know most of the history already. Chapter Five: *From Tumblr to the campus wars: creating scarcity in an online economy of virtue* gives a similar (though I think less fair; this chapter is the source of the much of the objectionable stuff quoted above) journalistic description of the "Tumblr left" and its worst excesses.{% fn %}

Nagle makes a point of distinguishing between the alt-right&mdash;Richard Spencer and his openly neo-Nazi chums&mdash;and the "alt-light"&mdash;Milo, Mike Cernovich, Sargon, and the hundreds of others with a youtube channel and an audience of thousands of credulous idiots. The former are the continuation of the American racist subcultures that have existed more-or-less covertly since the civil rights era, from the KKK to Stormfront (and in some cases they're the same people). They're boring, they're just garden-variety fascists. The latter are the ones who are really interesting (from a cultural studies point of view; I don't actually want to talk to any of them), and they're the ones most people really talking about when we talk about the alt-right. Nagle finds the alt-light interesting but doesn't really see them as dangerous (she and comes pretty close at times to the gross "modern prankster" reading of Milo Y.). I don't agree that the alt-light is not dangerous (more on that later), but I do agree that the alt-light and alt-right are patently different groups, even if one bleeds into the other. An interesting indicator of the difference between the groups has been their reaction to *Kill All Normies* itself. Rather predictably, the book's publication was followed almost immediately by Nagle receiving tides of the most awful abuse from Pepe-posting shits. But it wasn't uniform condemnation: at least some parts of the alt-light seem to actually *like* the book. Professional alt-light opinion-haver Mike Cernovich tweeted "Kill All Normies is a broad look and Internet culture and culture wars. Highly recommended."
Of course he recommends it, it's publicity. He makes a living by pandering to the anxieties of the kind of young conservatives who don't know they're conservative (see also: "libertarian" and "classical liberal"). Anything that looks like mainstream coverage is good for his brand and good for business.{% fn %} Same for Milo, same for 'Baked Alaska' (real name Tim "Treadstone" Gionet), same for the hundreds of lesser personalities with a YouTube channel and a very poor understanding of critical thoguht.

The hard alt-right are not interested in publicity. Or rather, they're only interested in publicity in so far as it helps them achieve their policy goals. Unlike the alt-light they have an actual agenda beyond the lulz. On their own they wouldn't really be a bigger problem than the hard-right has been for the last few decades, their views are too extreme to get any kind of purchase in the open. But, says Nagle, given a platform the hard alt-right are genuinely dangerous, and what's more the rise of the alt-light has given them that platform.{% fn %}. And this is her big worry. Her core claims are:
1. The alt-light/alt-right is a reaction against the gains of the identity left.
2. The tactics of the identity left are driving the growth of the alt-light.
3. The popularity of the alt-light brings legitimacy (and numbers) to the hard alt-right.

I don't think anybody disagrees with 3., except the alt-light themselves. 1. is more contentious, but I think it's basically correct. The tricky one is 2.
**I don't disagree, but I think the behaviour of the identity left is being used as an excuse by the right, the real cause is resent at their victories**
**The alt-light is deeply corrosive the project of making progressive ideals acceptable to society.**

Nagle ends her book with a plea for us (the left) to stop engaging in culture wars, to find some other way to combat the rise of the alt-right, to win the "battle of ideas". She argues that the modern left is not fit for this task:
>When Milo challenged his protesters to argue with him on his tour, he knew that they not only wouldn't, but also that they couldn't. They come from an intellectually shut down world of Tumblr and trigger warnings, and the purging of dissent in which they have only learned to recite jargon.  

and
> It was on this night, at the end of a yearlong tour throughout which the US campus left spectacularly failed to challenge him on the level of ideas..

The obvious question is: what "ideas" might those be? How do you argue with a man who responds to serious direct criticism by saying "calm down dear", who sells t-shirts that say "feminism is cancer", and whose followers count this behaviour as winning? That's the problem, our opponents aren't interested in an actual debate. The tactics of the identity left have given the alt-right a lot of its material, but its hard to believe that they're really interested in a genuine exchange of views. These people don't want to debate, they want attention.
They have no coherent political philosophy, they're just making money by saying the most offensive shit they can for the views and retweets. The way to win is not to play, but how can we not play when this shit has a direct affect on people's lives? I don't know the answer to this question, and neither does Angela Nagle. I do know that going along to a Milo talk and getting up on stage with the goal of owning him in civilised debate isn't going to work.

If the identity left jettisons its more objectionable elements, and starts engaging with the alt-right in the marketplace of ideas, what then? Do you really think the alt-right is going to start listening?

**something here about not knowing how to go forwards**
**so engaging the alt-light in debate wont work. And we reall don't want to engage the hard alt-right**

I don't know whether to recommend *Kill All Normies* or not. The parts chronicling the history of the alt-right and its various tributaries are accurate and make a good introduction. Nagle makes some neat observations that gave form to some things I was thinking, but there's not enough (for me) to sustain a whole book. The analytical parts are less well done and the book's journalistic style lets it down as a work of scholarship. It's hard to shake the feeling that it was rushed out to meet the market while the alt-right are still at their peak (...hopefully this is the peak). I can imagine other, better, books about the alt-right I'd like to read and I hope they are going to get written.

If you want an opinion on whether or not *Kill All Normies* is a good book politically speaking, then my opinion is this: if you are interested in these things, and you want to be informed on the current state of the discourse, you ought to read it. The topic is so contentious and the reviews have been so ideologically flavoured&mdash;I've yet to see a review in totally good faith&mdash;that I don't think you can get a fair appraisal from somebody else's reading. It is short and quite cheap, so you've got no excuse not to read it if you're going to sound off on Twitter about it.

<hr>
<div style="font-size: 80%">
{% footnotes %}
{% fnbody %}
...and people of colour, and non-heterosexual and non-cis people, and every group that isn't white western males.
{% endfnbody %} <br>
{% fnbody %}
There's no serious debate to be had here. The whole GamerGate movement was conceived as an excuse to push back against and punish the people working for better representation in games; this is well-documented in IRC logs from the time. Were there some journalists who behaved less than ethically in support of progressive causes? Almost certainly. Were the GamerGators actually opposing this on a principle rather than looking for ammo in a culture war? Of course not.
{% endfnbody %}<br>
{% fnbody %}
This is also the time that "SJW" became a commonly-used epithet. "Social justice warrior" has stuck because it so perfectly fits the reactionaries' picture of their opponents. When pushed, most of them will say that it's not the 'scoial justice' that they are opposed to, it's the 'warrior' part: the shaming, the reading everything in the worst possible light. The irony that the alt-right participants in the culture war are exhibiting exactly this same keyboard-warrior behaviour seems lost on them.  
Like a lot of derogatory terms used in the culture wars (see also: "virtue signalling", "mainsplaining"), SJW is popular because it contains some truth and, originally at least, points to a real phenomenon. Unfortunately such terms are quickly stripped of all meaning beyond 'my enemy in the culture war'. This is kind of a shame because it *could* be a useful term for the more extremist and/or ridiculous elements of the 'identity' or 'Tumblr' left, a useful way to separate people engaging in identity politics in good faith from those who use the staus of being woke merely to elevate themselves and scorn others. But using "SJW" non-ironically has become the most powerful shibboleth of all, it is well beyond rehabilitation. There's no way I could use it and carry you along with me. This utter degradation of language is one of my least favourite things about being on the internet in 2017.
{% endfnbody %}<br>
{% fnbody %}
The indistinguishability of the 'left' and 'right' on economic issues, after Clinton and Blair, is by now an generally accepted trope. The complementary trope is that in this same period the center-right parties have shunned their more Conservative fringes and re-branded themselves as being broadly on board with socially progressive policies that are typically the domain of the left, and have also, surely intentionally, declined to enact their own tough talk on immigration. One view of this is that the left and right have been engaged in a tacit bargain for the last two decades, each accepting part of the other's agenda in return for the furthering of a complementary part of their own agenda. A useful term my friends use for this period of co-support is ["the long 90s"](https://jeremygilbertwriting.files.wordpress.com/2015/09/the-end-of-the-long-90s1.pdf). The long 90s are surely drawing to a close as the parties lurch apart again&mdash;to the alt-right and, more encouragingly, to the socialist left. The coming years are likely to be of historic importance.
{% endfnbody %} <br>
{% fnbody %}
And there really are excesses, and Nagle lists some of them. I'm not talking about otherkin or the fantasy gender lists of teens exploring gender, but the very real minority who would use their own victimhood as an excuse for extraordinary callousness and cruelty towards others.
{% endfnbody %}<br>
{% fnbody %}
Cernovich posted a follow-up tweet with a picture of the page of the book that talks about him, on which he has scribbled corrections to his number of twitter followers (220k to 300k) and the name of his book ("Guerrilla mindset" to "Gorilla mindset"). That Cernovich responds to a book-length analysis of his movement's history and ideas with a tweet correcting his personal number of followers and book name tells you pretty much everything about what he's in it for.
{% endfnbody %}<br>
{% fnbody %}
**Added later:** It's very hard to dispute this after the events of Charlottesville, the first large openly-Swastika-waving neo-Nazi demo in a generation.
{% endfnbody %}<br>
{% endfootnotes %}
</div>
