A post about the meeting I was in where our NA sales person updated us on our relationship with Amazon. I've always felt that our sales people's relationship to Amazon was like a tribal seer or some other occultist, trying to interpret the mind of God: amazon the organisation being huge, opaque, and all-powerful and organisations being impenetrable at the best of times: the usual corporations a mind metaphor. Then something amusing happened, when our sales guy told us that recent ordering behaviour on amazon's part has had huge anomalies, and the amazon people couldn't explain them because they didn't understand --- amazon's ordering is now done by machine learning algorithms (Michael: "the parameters aren't set by humans, their algorithms write their algorithms" -- okay, near enough). This was very funny because now amazon doesn't know the mind of amazon either, and we certainly don't.

I'm reminded of all those articles about AlphaGo playing Go and Chess now at a level so far beyond human players its not the same game: they're not recognisably  playing like humans but better; they make moves that make no sense, that achieve nothing or apparently worse than nothing, but then magically 20 moves later everything is in the right place and the balance changes completely for the win. The worry is that while we're happy because now Amazon is placing implausibly large orders, who's to say they just won't order anything at all for a year at some point, also for a reason we (and their people) don't understand? I'm terrified, but also incredibly excited to see this principle illustrated outside the confines of a Go board.

FN1 The other useful metaphor for thinking about our sales people's relationship with Amazon is an abusive relationship: they dominate their suppliers, dictate everything to us, and our sales people come back and tell us how marvelous all the services they force us to use are. They know its bad and they're determined to enjoy it as much as possible.
